From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Babaro. This is the daily.
[Music]
In a dramatic act of protest on Sunday
night, Democratic lawmakers in Texas
began to flee their own state. It's a
lastditch attempt to stop President
Trump and Texas Republicans from
redrawing the state's congressional maps
in a way that will eliminate Democratic
seats and could help lock in a
Republican majority in next year's
elections.
Today, my colleague Shane Goldmacher on
a new chapter in the era of unvarnished
partisan warfare.
[Applause]
[Music]
It's Monday, August 4th.
>> Hey.
>> Hello. You want me to sit here, right?
>> Yeah. The place you've always sat for
>> I'm just checking. I don't know.
>> For years.
>> Okay. Thanks for being here, Shane.
>> Thank you. As we speak, the eyes of the
country, or at least the eyes of lots of
people in politics, are on Texas because
dozens of its state Democratic lawmakers
have literally fled the state. So, let
me start this episode with a simple
question. Why is all of this happening
in Texas? And why is all of this
happening right now? Let me start this
episode with a very simple answer.
because Donald Trump wants it and he
wants it now. What Donald Trump wants is
to keep control of the House of
Representatives after the 2026 midterms
because he knows that if Democrats take
control of Congress, that his agenda is
suddenly put on ice, that investigations
that his administration has been
launching is going to be the subject of
Democratic investigations.
>> The investigations will be investigated.
>> Absolutely. He could be impeached again,
right? He was impeached twice in his
first term. If the Democrats take the
House, they might impeach him for
something else, a third time. And so
long before the midterms, even before
there are candidates in some of these
races, Donald Trump and his political
operation are looking at how do they
shape the battlefield for 2026,
>> right? How do they keep this presidency
on the rather astonishingly
smooth, empowered track that it's on?
>> Yeah. And so Trump looks at Texas where
there are 38 congressional districts and
13 Democratic held seats and he imagines
a future. Well, maybe there doesn't need
to be so many Democratic held seats in
Texas. What if there are fewer than say
10 Democratic held seats?
>> What if we just delete some of them?
>> What if we just redraw those lines? And
so Trump begins making his wishes known
>> on Texas. How many more seats do you
want the Republicans to draw? And then
>> he and his team get in touch with the
governor of Texas, Greg,
>> with the Republican Congress members
from Texas and says, "This is what I'd
like you to do.
>> Texas would be the biggest one, and
that'll be five."
>> And I think it's worth putting in
context what is five seats. Republicans
slim, historically slim majority after
2024 was three seats, right? If
Democrats retake the House next year,
they will try to reverse all of the
progress that we've made, which is
record setting progress.
>> So, Democrats could take back the
Congress by flipping three seats. If
Donald Trump gets five new seats in
Texas, that majority becomes eight
seats. It is more than doubling the
entire cushion of the current Republican
majority.
>> Right? And it's worth saying, even for a
president who does many things
atypically and unconventionally,
publicly announcing that you are going
to basically compel
state Republican leaders to make a map
that benefits your political fortune as
president and redraw it along those
lines. That's unusual.
>> Also, it's not usual to redraw the maps
just whenever you want them. These maps
are typically drawn once a decade.
There's a census. The census counts how
many people are in every corner of
America. The country divides up its
congressional districts and every state
is charged with drawing these lines in
response to the census. And so what
Trump is saying is actually we don't
have a new census, but I have a need.
But I have a need and I want new lines.
And so Greg Abbott calls a special
session and has convened Texas
lawmakers. And one of the explicit goals
of this special session is doing exactly
these lines.
>> So once this special session is
underway, what do Texas Republicans do
with this pretty unusually timed
marching order from President Trump to
give him something like five safe
Republican House seats that do not
currently exist.
>> What you don't hear is very many
objections from Republicans in Texas to
this, but you also don't hear a whole
lot of cheerleading. They're not overly
eager to tear up these maps. They hold
>> Just explain why not.
>> For the members of Congress, they like
their districts, right? These are
members who have won their existing
district. They know their areas. They're
not necessarily eager to see lines
redrawn. And if you are trying to carve
out new Republican seats, well, where
are you getting those Republican votes
from? You're taking it from existing
Republican members of Congress's
districts, right? you are potentially
diluting some of the voters in their
districts to shore up new Republican
seats.
>> There's actually a fun name for this.
So, in general, this process where you
redraw lines politically for partisan
gain is called gerrymander.
>> But there's actually another name for a
gerrymander that goes so far that it
backfires. And that's a dummy mander.
>> Dummy mander. That's that's a new one.
>> Yeah. A dummy mander is basically you
dilute your existing seats so much in an
effort to draw new ones that in a wave
election you end up losing more seats
than you gained.
>> Right? And in theory a wave election in
which Democrats really outperform
is entirely possible given the
aggressiveness with which the president
has pursued his agenda in this period.
>> Yeah. And so there is some mostly
private concerns about well how
aggressive is the president and the
Republicans going to be in redrawing
these seats because these members are
okay with new Republicans but they don't
want it to come at the cost of their own
district.
>> And do these Texas House Republicans
have any say whatsoever in what the new
versions of their own districts look
like when this process is over?
>> I mean the answer is no. Remarkably
little. Right. It is the president
coming up with this idea and it's state
legislators and the governor in Texas
actually drawing and signing these maps
into law.
>> And these maps are not being drawn in
public. They're being drawn entirely
behind closed doors. And then on
Wednesday last week, they posted the
maps online
and everybody quickly began looking to
figure out what exactly they had done.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So Shane, tell us about the new maps
that Texas Republicans ended up
releasing just a couple days ago.
>> So what we learned pretty quickly is
that Republicans did what President
Trump asked them to do, which is carve
out as many as five new fairly safe
Republican districts in Texas.
>> And how do they do that?
>> Well, Texas is is a big state and it has
a lot of big metro areas. And so the way
I break it down is that there are three
big metro areas and in each of them the
Republicans carved out a new Republican
seat. So in Houston they took what had
been a Democratic seat and they made it
more Republican. In Dallas, the same
thing. And also in San Antonio.
>> So that's three of the five.
>> That's three of the five. And the other
two are in the Rio Grand Valley along
the Texas border. And this is an area
that has swung about as sharply toward
Trump as any part of the entire country.
And it's an area with two incumbent
Democratic members of Congress who have
won in that area even as Trump
>> won their districts last year.
>> They took those two Democratic members
of Congress and said, "Guess what?
You're going to have to win an even more
proTrump district now." Mhm. And when
you look not just at those two seats,
but in fact all five new seats, there's
sort of a new magic number that
Republicans seem to have settled on. And
that's 60%.
>> H just explain 60% of what
>> that is that Trump won 60% of the vote
in all of these new five districts that
they've carved out. Republicans seem to
think that a district where Trump
carried 60% of the vote in 2024, that is
going to be a place where Republicans
are going to safely be able to win in
2026. I wonder if you can give us an
example of one of these districts that's
been redrawn so that a Democrat really
has not much of a shot. In fact,
Republicans have that 60% chance of
winning.
>> Yeah. I think that of the three big
cities we talked about, the one that is
most striking to me is the new San
Antonio seat. So, the old district, this
is the 35th district in Texas, actually
stretched between two cities. It took in
blue parts of Austin and then took in
blue parts of San Antonio.
>> And this is a safe Democratic seat
represented by a safe Democratic
congressman. And that old district has
basically disappeared and it's been
replaced by a seat that only takes in
parts of blue San Antonio and then a
whole bunch of red areas all around the
city and dropped the Austin part
entirely. And so that change takes this
district that had been solidly
Democratic and makes it a proTrump new
Republican seat. And along the way, they
took the two Democrats who used to
represent parts of Austin, and have
basically stuffed them into a new single
district, probably forcing them to run
against each other.
>> And somehow Republicans did what you're
describing more or less, five times
over, and without creating a whole lot
of risk for themselves.
>> Yeah, that 60% is not just for the new
districts. It's actually for the old
districts, too. So all the Republicans,
none of their seats were watered down
below that margin either. Right. So, if
you're an incumbent Republican in
Congress and you were nervous that, oh
my goodness, they're going to take too
many of my voters and put them in these
new seats. Well, they did take some of
your voters, but they didn't put you
below that 60% margin either. That's why
it's this sort of magic number across
basically the entire state. Every
Republican is at a 60% Trump district.
So, from everything you're describing
here, it sounds like these new maps do a
very successful job at avoiding the
dreaded dummy mander. But I want to
return for just a moment to the two new
districts along the southern border
that, as you said, have swung toward
President Trump during presidential
elections, but are still held by
Democratic House members. Even with
these new lines, could those two seats
still be winnable by Democrats? Look,
the way the Republicans have drawn this
map, it's basically all upside, but
those two districts are an example of
the sort of assumptions that the
Republican party has put in doing this
map. And the assumption is that Latino
voters that swung very heavily in
Trump's direction and very, very heavily
in the Rio Grand Valley are going to
continue to be Republican voters. And
that is not at all guaranteed. and
Democrats are studying whether there's
shifts back already happening.
>> And so those two Democratic members of
Congress are saying that yes, Trump
might have won by 60% of these
districts, but that doesn't mean that
Republicans have been winning these
areas for years and years and years. And
as I've talked to Democrats who are a
bit depressed at the lack of
opportunities in these maps, they are
booed by the fact that in some of these
places, they need to go back to not so
many years ago performance levels for
Democrats to still have a chance. So,
what Democrats are hoping, and we'll get
an answer to whether that hope is
realistic, is that Hispanic support for
Republicans in 2024 was unique to Donald
Trump and that when he's not on the
ballot, which he won't be in the next
midterm,
Hispanic voters will not show up for
some generic, even Trump supported House
Republican in those two districts.
>> Absolutely. And look, I mean, we haven't
talked about this, but there's a lot of
things happening in the world
politically that are not looking good
for the Republican party. The big bill
that he passed has not been popular so
far. It takes away potential Medicare
coverage in the future for people in
Texas. Those are heavily used programs
in poorer parts of the state. And so,
how this plays out is really open. But
the big political advantage for Trump
and for Republicans in redrawing these
seats is they basically are guaranteeing
themselves extra districts anyway.
>> Right. You're saying that even if
Democrats somehow hold on to those two
border seats, big if, but they could,
Republicans still pretty much are
guaranteed to win the other three new
gerrymandered districts. And that leaves
Democrats with precious few options,
which I think brings us to what happened
on Sunday night, just within the last
couple of hours. So just describe that.
So Texas Democratic state legislators
have been discussing privately and a
little publicly a nuclear option for a
couple of weeks. And that's if enough of
them leave the state, they can prevent
Republicans from even voting on the maps
that they've drafted. that if there
aren't enough Democrats in Texas when
the legislature meets enough of them at
the capital, the Republicans can't
formally vote. They don't have a quorum.
And so
>> they shut it all down.
>> They just shut it down. And if they're
in Texas, they can be brought to the
capital, right, by state police. And so
a pretty dramatic thing happened on
Sunday, which is these Democratic
legislators gathered in secret and then
got on a chartered plane well
>> to leave Texas and they flew to Chicago.
And how long do they anticipate staying
there? How long do they hope to wait out
the Republicans back in the Texas
capital who just want to get enough
votes to pass these maps? Presumably,
they cannot stay outside the state until
the next midterm election in like a year
and a half.
>> Yeah, this is the challenge. This is why
it's a tactic and maybe not a long-term
strategy. These lawmakers are certainly
willing to potentially stay out for the
rest of this special session, right? So,
the governor, Greg Abbott, called a
session for one month, and so sure, they
can wait out a couple of weeks. So,
let's say they wait out this special
session. Well, guess what? the governor
can call another special session for 30
days immediately again. And they're not
just, you know, on vacation out of the
state. They are facing fines, a $500 a
day fine for exiting the state when they
are supposed to be there and voting.
This is something the Republicans put in
place to prevent this kind of quorum
break. And so we don't know how long
they're willing to stay out, but because
of the drama of this, because of the act
of saying this is so bad, we are willing
to leave the state we're supposed to
serve. They're hoping to draw attention.
And so these Texas state legislators on
Sunday evening held a news conference
telling the public why they left the
state. And they're trying to bring
attention to this because the Democrats
don't have the votes to stop this right
now. The best they can do is try to
rally public support behind them and
against the Republican plan.
>> Got it. Let's assume, Shane, for the
purposes of this conversation, that
Democrats in Texas can't stop this. I'm
curious
whether Republicans elsewhere in the
country are trying to replicate the
Texas strategy that you just described
before the midterm election in order to
guarantee
even more seats through map redrawing.
>> I mean, the short answer is yes,
absolutely. And other states are not as
far along as Texas, but they're talking
about places like Missouri where there's
a Democratic district they could help
disappear. Florida, there's really a lot
of pushes to do this all over the
country. I actually spoke with a person
who's close to the president who
described the White House's approach as
maximum warfare everywhere all the time
>> when it comes to redrawing districts
wherever he can. Absolutely. And so I
think it's worth thinking about Texas as
the beginning of this process and not
necessarily the end. Where does that
leave Democrats?
We've talked about this on the show
before. The Democrats
have struggled to keep up with the way
Republicans gerrymander for all kinds of
reasons. Some they've just been
outmaneuvered. Others they've had real
objections to the idea that this is the
way the democracy should work. Yeah,
there's a big swath of the Democratic
party who has opposed partisan
gerrymandering overall, and some of the
biggest and bluest states, New York and
California in particular, have adopted
commission models where nonpartisan
groups redraw the lines once a decade,
>> but they've taken it out of the hands of
Democratic state legislators.
>> Yeah. But Gavin Newsome has come out and
said,
>> "They're not screwing around. We cannot
afford to screw around either. We have
got to fight fire with fire.
>> We are willing to try to do anything we
can to respond to what Texas has done
even though the state constitution as
approved by voters created lines that
are drawn. This
>> is not an idol threat to our democracy.
This is real and we not only have the
backs Texans uh but we may be back to
the ballot here in California trying to
write this wrong. And so Nuome is going
about a process now where he is talking
about having the legislature draw new
lines and put it on the ballot for a
vote to have the voters overturn their
own constitution on a one-time basis to
respond to Texas's lines.
>> Wow. And let Democrats get in the
gerrymandering game
>> and carve out another four or five seats
in retaliation for what Texas did. M we
can sit back and act as if we have some
moral superiority and watch this 249
almost 250 year experiment be washed
away. We are not going to allow that to
happen.
>> As Newsome was talking about this the
other day, he said something that was
really striking to me and applies I
think not just to his case. He says
California's moral high ground means
nothing if we're powerless because of
it. It's this the end justify the means
approach and you hear this from other
governors too.
>> I'd like them to understand that if
they're going to take this drastic
action that we also might take drastic
action to respond.
>> JB Pritsker in Illinois where they
already have a partisan gerrymander
helping Democrats has talked about maybe
we can squeeze an extra seat out of
this. I'm not surprised that they're
trying to break the rules to get an
advantage, but that's undemocratic.
And not only are we calling them out,
we're also going to see what our options
are.
>> Kathy Hokll in New York, where again it
is prohibited to do this in the middle
of a decade in between censuses is
saying maybe we too need to push the
boundaries.
>> What I'm going to say is all fair and
love and war.
>> That you can't just stand by as the
Republicans go about this process.
>> Right? So suddenly that quote from
somebody near the president who had said
partisan warfare everywhere all the time
that mantra could now well be the
message from both parties when it comes
to the kind of new era of endless
partisan redrawing of congressional
districts that we're now expecting to be
upon us.
>> Yeah. The idea of gerrymandering itself
is not new, right? It's almost as old as
the country. And both parties have done
this. Democrats have jerrymandered and
Republicans have jerrymandered. But what
we have here is the redrawing of lines
nowhere near a census for basically
explicit partisan gain. The
>> power grab.
>> Yeah, it's a power grab. And the
aggressiveness of this has caused a
break glass moment for a lot of
Democrats who
>> have been concerned about engaging in
gerrymandering. And the one that really
comes to mind is Eric Holder, who is the
former attorney general under President
Obama, who has led basically a
Democratic redistricting arm seeking to
take this power away from lawmakers all
across the country.
>> His message, and he's he delivered it on
the daily, we interviewed him, is
there's one right way to do this, and
it's nonpartisan, to depoliticize it.
And right now he's saying there's
actually another right way to do this,
which is temporarily
to get in the game and start drawing
districts even more aggressively. And he
used a pretty fascinating analogy with
my colleague Nick Corsini. He said that
this is like when the Germans invaded
France and you're just going to say,
"Oh, we're we're against war and so
we're for resolution, so we're going to
just lay down arms." He's like, "No,
sometimes you have to take up arms." And
this is that moment
>> for redistricting.
>> So what we're talking about Texas, I
think that it's important not to think
of Texas as the end, but as the
beginning, the beginning of a series of
Republican efforts to redraw the maps
ahead of 2026 and a potential series of
Democratic responses back and forth.
>> Mhm. And this ends where? Well, Congress
already has extremely few genuine swing
districts. If you look back compared to
decades, it's a really tiny map. And
partisan gerrymandering is an explicit
attempt to make that map even smaller,
sort of vanishingly small number of
genuinely competitive seats between the
two parties, right? and lawmakers who
therefore represent moderation,
compromise, the ability to cross party
lines.
>> Yeah. If you are a Democrat in a safe
Democratic seat, the only way you can
lose your election is if you lose a
primary. And if you're a Republican in
one of these new safe Republican seats,
guess what? You're never worried about
angering Democrats. You only are
concerned about angering the right-wing
of your own party. And so it makes it
harder and harder to bring people
together once they're in Congress, which
as we already see is pretty hard for
most recent Congresses to do. At the
most basic level though, elections are
about voters having their voices heard.
And if you draw lines so only partisans
voices are heard, then you are sort of
muting the moderates. And in America,
moderates are the people whose opinions
often change, right? They're the ones
who are swinging between the two
different parties. And so if you end up
in a system with safe Democratic and
safe Republican seats, then you get a
system that's less accountable to swings
in public opinion,
>> right?
>> And that's what elections are. They're
measuring whether public opinion has.
>> That's what they can be. That's what
they once were.
And so what you can end up with is a
democracy that's less responsive to
public opinion
and more a measure of which political
party has more raw power and a
willingness to use it.
[Music]
Well, Shane, thank you very much. Thank
you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Both Democrats and Republicans are
criticizing President Trump's decision
on Friday to fire the Commissioner of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Erica
McInterer. The firing came just hours
after McInterer's office issued its
monthly jobs report, which showed that
job growth in July was half as much as
last year's average. Trump accused
McInterer, who was appointed by
President Biden, but confirmed by
senators of both parties, of
manipulating the jobs data. But there is
no evidence to support that claim. And
Trump's own former labor statistics
chief expressed shock at the decision,
calling it totally groundless and saying
that it sets a quote dangerous
precedent.
Today's episode was produced by Alex
Stern and Carlos Prito with help from
Mary Wilson and Diana Win. It was edited
by Rachel Quester with help from Mark
George. Contains original music by
Alicia Etup and Dan Powell and was
engineered by Chris Wood. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Lansfk
of Wonderly. Special thanks to Marian
Lozano.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bubaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]